.. _runningNuMAD:

Running NuMAD
================

The following sections go through the basics of putting together and
analyzing a blade design in NuMAD, from creating a blade object, to
modifying its parameters and attributes, and generating structural models
for analysis. Tips for implementation are given to ensure the smoothest
execution.

.. _bladeGen:

Blade Generation
----------------

There are several ways to construct a blade model in NuMAD
3.0. In many ways the most intuitive approach is by using the graphical
user interface carried over from NuMAD 2.0 (for detailed instructions,
please refer to the NuMAD 2.0 user manual [3]). Although the current
version is designed not to be reliant on this GUI, it is still supported
and can be a useful tool if designing a blade model from scratch.

A more automated way to generate a blade model is by reading a ``.yaml``
file, and using the data stored within to populate the model definition.
The ``.yaml`` format contains all the geometric, aerodynamic and material
information needed to define a blade structure, and is widely used in
the field, making it a convenient choice for the source data file.
Several examples of ``.yaml`` files are provided in the ``NuMAD/examples`` directory
of the GitHub repository.

.. Kelley: this would be a good place to introduce the difference between the source directory and the case directory (for a run)

To read a ``.yaml`` file's data into NuMAD from a MATLAB script or command
window, first save the ``.yaml`` file in the working directory for the blade
model. Typically, each blade design should have its own working
directory, which contains aerodynamic/airfoil data, FAST input files
(``*.fst`` extension) and subfolders for NuMAD operations and FAST
simulation output files (``*.out`` extension). Once the ``.yaml`` file is saved
alongside these items, it can be read by creating a new blade object of
type ``BladeDef`` and calling the reader function, as shown:

.. code-block:: matlabsession

    >> blade = BladeDef
    >> blade.readYAML(<yamlfilename>)

After entering these commands, the blade model data will be stored in
the object called ``blade``, which can be printed out and modified as
desired as further explained in :ref:`bladeVarAssign`. Many types of analysis and
operations can be performed once a blade model is stored as a blade
object in this way. 

If it is desired to run aeroelastic simulation with
``runIEC``, or to generate loads from FAST-generated output files as
described in :ref:`FEAOps`, it is advisable to update the FAST input files
in the blade's main working directory to ensure that certain quantities
within are consistent with the data stored in the ``.yaml`` file, such as
prebend, presweep, and structural twist. This can be done using the
commands

.. code-block:: matlabsession

    >> 	runIEC_ipt
    >> 	updateFASTFromBLADEDef(params,blade)

The ``runIEC_ipt.m`` script initializes a data structure named ``params``, which
stores variables related to the analysis and simulation (``NuMAD\examples\lost+found\runIEC_ipt--EXAMPLE.m``), 
and is passed along with the blade object into the update
function.

.. NOTE::
	``runIEC_ipt`` must be saved in the working directory

After all desired analyses and modifications are complete, a new,
updated ``.yaml`` file can be generated to represent the optimized, or
re-designed blade. To do this issue the command:

.. code-block:: matlabsession

    >> writeYAML(blade,<newyamlfilename>);

The new file name should be of the form ``<originalfile>_mod.yaml``, adding
an ``_mod`` extension to the name of the original ``.yaml`` file from which
the blade model was generated. The new file will be written into the
blade model's working directory alongside the original.

Generating blades from ``.yaml`` files is useful for streamlining analysis
and optimization processes, since all operations can be called from a
MATLAB script, without depending on the graphical user interface or any
manual input during execution.



.. _bladeVarAssign:

Blade Variable Assignment
-------------------------

Any blade design process involves setting and modifying characteristics
of the blade's geometric, structural, and material properties in some
way. The NuMAD blade object contains a collection of variables that
represent these properties, and can be set and modified by value
assignment within a MATLAB script or in the command line. A
comprehensive list of all public variables in the ``BladeDef`` class used in
NuMAD is given in the :ref:`classDefs`.

Here we give some highlighted examples of key variables within the blade
object and their basic access. The overall shape of the blade is defined
largely by the stations (access: ``blade.stations``). Each station
contains several variables whose values can be edited. For instance, if
a blade model was generated by reading a ``.yaml`` file as described in
:ref:`bladeGen`, and it was desired to set the spanwise position of the
second station at 3.5 meters, the command

.. code-block:: matlabsession

    >> blade.stations(2).spanlocation = 3.5

could be used. Many variables are arrays with multiple values, and can
be set according using standard MATLAB syntax. The coordinates of the
points defining the outer airfoil shape at a given station, for example,
are stored in the airfoil object at each individual station as an :math:`N X 2`
array, and can be set as follows:

.. code-block:: matlabsession

    >> blade.stations(2).airfoil.coordinates = [X1, Y1; X2, Y2; ...; XN, YN]

There are several properties that each define some aspect of the blade's
shape with a value at any given spanwise location, including chord
length, angle of twist, aerodynamic center, sweep and prebend. These can
be set at any number of spanwise points, with the variable *span*
specifying their locations. If a user wanted to, say, set the prebend of
the blade to some constant :math:`k` times cube of the spanwise location,
specified at 10 equally spaced points, they could set

.. code-block:: matlabsession

    >> blade.span = linspace(0,<bladeLength>,10);
    >> blade.prebend = k*blade.span.^3;

The bulk of the structural properties of the blade's components are
stored in ``blade.components`` variable. A single component contains a name,
a material ID number, labels representing the points it spans between
according to :numref:`bladeKeyPoints`, and a control point array, called ``cp``. The
control point array specifies the thickness of the given component at
every spanwise location, expressed in number of layers (the actual
thickness of a layer is defined by the material object it corresponds
to, shown shortly). Suppose component 3 in the blade was the suction
side spar cap, and it was desired to vary the thickness linearly from 10
layers at the root to 2 layers at the tip, say 50 meters span. The user
could set

.. code-block:: matlabsession

    >> blade.components(3).cp = [0, 10; 50, 2];

The width of the spar caps and the leading edge and trailing edge bands
are single nominal values for the entire length of the blade, stored in
the variables ``blade.sparcapwidth``, ``blade.leband`` and ``blade.teband``
respectively.

The data defining the properties of all the materials used throughout
the blade are stored in the variable ``blade.materials``. Each entry in
``blade.materials`` is a ``MaterialDef`` object, which stores a name, elastic
properties, density, and strength properties among others (see :ref:`materialClass` in the :ref:`classDefs`). 
It also stores the thickness that a single layer of that material in a 
composite is assumed to be, which can be important to know or edit when 
defining the thickness distribution of the blade's components as just described.

After editing the design properties of a blade model as illustrated in
these few examples, a user should run the command

.. code-block:: matlabsession

    >> blade.UpdateBlade()

This function updates numerous internal private variables based on the
edited values in the public variables. Among other things, it
interpolates the properties that vary along the span of the blade to the
spanwise points specified in the variable ``blade.ispan``. These include
all the properties defined in ``blade.stations``, as well as the general
spanwise properties such as prebend, twist, etc. ``UpdateBlade`` also
updates the bill of materials for the blade, stored in ``blade.bom`` and
various details of the geometry, stored in ``blade.geometry``.

When the variables defining the blade design are set to satisfaction,
the blade object can be used to perform various operations for analysis
and optimization, such as generating representative structural models as
described in the next section.

.. _genBladeStructural:

Generating Representative Blade Structural Models
-------------------------------------------------

A NuMAD blade object can be used to construct structural models for
various types of analysis. Several tools exist that analyze
characteristics such as section stiffness, mass, and natural frequencies
of wind blades by representing them with low-fidelity beam models. These
include PreComp, BModes, and BPE. The most straightforward way of
invoking these capabilities is through the graphical user interface (for
details please see ref. [3]).

In addition to these, however, NuMAD 3.0 has many built-in functions for
performing high-fidelity analysis of a blade as a shell-element model in
ANSYS, which are easily invokable from a MATLAB script or command line.
These include analysis for maximum tip deflection, ultimate rupture
failure, global and local buckling, fatigue and natural frequencies and
are discussed in detail in :ref:`FEAOps`.